## History

The National Union of the Homeless (NUH) originally formed in the late
1980s and early 1990s in response to shifting economic conditions
resulting in mass homelessness of families and former workers across
our country. The formation of the shelter system that is a central
part of the nonprofit industrial complex today formed at this time as
well. From the shelters, encampments, and abandoned buildings folks
came together to fight, speak out and organize against the very
conditions that have made them homeless.

In June 2019 organizers from across the country gathered in Washington
DC at the Poor People’s Campaign: A National Call For Moral Revival’s
Moral Congress. At this gathering we voted to form the Committee to
Reestablish the NUH.

Today the revitalized NUH has established multiple locals throughout
11 states, we held our first Officer’s Trainer School Fall 2019 and we
continue to grow throughout the country as we uphold the slogans,
legacy and practices of the original NUH; such as "You Only Get What
You Are Organized To Take!," "Homeless Not Helpless!," and "Housing Now
Not Death On The Streets!"

The NUH then and now is made up of members currently and formerly
experiencing homelessness as well as organizers understanding this is
a fight for the survival of all the poor and dispossessed in our
nation. The power the NUH is proof that we can speak for ourselves,
think for ourselves, and organize together to lead not just ourselves
but the nation in changing the very system that continues to create
homelessness every day in this country.
